# Few things I’ve learned as a designer

by Anna Vokounová

- View 💬 [figma slides](https://www.figma.com/proto/0N8ElwgWVoWV3GnkLCClg8/Talk?page-id=0%3A1&node-id=0-14&starting-point-node-id=0%3A14)
- View ✏️ [the process](process.md) <!-- Preparation, show and tell your process; think, case study. -->

Here is a transcript of the presentation 👇🏼

## Few things I’ve learned as a designer
When I was asked to think of a story to share, I thought to myself What could I possibly share that would be somehow useful to you? I am a junior designer currently pursuing my bachelor's year so I was thinking that I could summon and kind of reflect on things that I’ve learned during my professional design journey.

Maybe some of you have experience with oil painting. My professor in high school learned me that this is the correct technique to paint the first layers.  This technique I told you about surely has a painting logic behind it but it also helps get rid of the scary empty whiteness. It is messy, weird and frustrating, full of trial and error, and ultimately incomplete depiction of what the final piece will be. I think in that way the first layers are a lot like your 20s. It's mostly a mess and trying to figure it out but as first layers, they are crucial for the integrity and foundation of the work and even the most gracious works have them. But sometimes even this doesn’t bring me comfort and I still feel like this. Sometimes I still feel like I suck. But I think that's normal. Let me tell you why...

Last summer I went to work full-time in the design studio which was pretty much my first real design work experience. And these were my thought pretty much all the time.
Some time passed and I started to be a little bit more comfortable and I gain some confidence in what I am doing. I love the book called Why has nobody told me this before by famous clinical psychologist Julie Smith. She wrote that gaining confidence comes from going somewhere where you have no confidence at all. Confidence is like a home that you have to build, when you go somewhere else you have to build a new one but every time yous start with a better foundation than before and it eventually gets easier. And I think that the point of not only our 20s but our whole life is to continuously build these little houses by learning and practicing new things.

So what stands in our (well, at least in mine) way? 

I give you an example from my normal life when I was meant to prepare my very first yoga class. I had crystal clear ideas of how it should go and what people should get from my class. I wanted it to be like a safe space where you throw behind all ideas about how the poses should look and allow yourself just try and be your imperfect you. As I encouraged people to lose the negative voice in their heads, mine on the other hand began to feel like a war general who was not going to cut any slack anytime soon. So I was the right example of not practicing what I was preaching. I think this picture says it all. As you might guess I am talking about perfectionism. 

To clarify perfectionism is not the same thing as striving to be your best. Perfection is not about healthy achievement and growth but most likely pressures us to think that we have to be perfect on all occasions and otherwise, we are not worth it or it's not worth it. So how this can manifest in the creative process? Yes right…it can crush it or in the best-case scenario, it can take all the fun out of it. The overwhelming fear of not getting it right sometimes may stand in the way of even beginning the project. Sometimes solid perfectionists take an excessive amount of time to complete a task that does not typically take others long to complete.  As a result, they may focus less on the process of learning or completing a task to the best of their ability.

Once I attended this class for creating expressive characters illustration because I thought I will make use of it for my thesis. And it was so much fun and I loved it for the first time in a very long time I felt free when creating something that I didn't judge my work afterward. There were some kinds of exercises like doing a scribble and making a character out of it, drawing people from the street and simultaneously forget about anatomy rules and exaggerate features. The reason why I loved so much to draw these silly figures was mainly that process fight my perfectionist traits. Here is something that I took from it and cherish it since then. Don't worry too much about the outcome or at least that much. Try to shut up that negative self-talk. Sometimes you don’t have time or you are not into it and that’s the magic of doing things just to get them done. I do this usually with a timer. I set a timer and do what I can so I can feel like I gave it time I did my best in that time slot and that’s all that this task deserves. And of course, you can always edit it later, it is nice because now you have *SOMETHING TO EDIT*. And finally, the one that affected me the most. You are not your work. Your work doesn’t define your value.  

So I will encourage you similarly like in that yoga class, but today I will listen to it too. If some of are sometime experiencing similar struggles as me Be brave, be brave to be bad at something and to make mistakes. You are not alone in this. Something will come out of it. And maybe you will build yourself another little house. 🥹❤️
